# Song Lyrics Project
*Data Science Capstone Project*

##12 Song lyrics (Synergic Partners) 

###12.1 Motivation and Background:
Sometimes, when we listen to a new song we think that it is the best song ever, that no one before has talked about the same things, topics or feelings. Other times (most of them for me), we feel as if this new song is not so new, as if we have listened to it before, as it is more of the same. The proposal here is to really test this, following a scientifically manner. So the project is mainly related with text analytics. But not only this, also scraping techniques, machine learning algorithms, visualization methodologies, and more (depending on your imagination), could be applied in the development of the project.

###12.2 The Data Set:
The project dataset will be composed by songs lyrics. So it will be possible to chose your preferred artists or groups and create your own (multilingual?) dataset extracting the info from some of the numerous web pages with this kind of content. Other data sources as web pages related to music news can could be used to have an idea of the latest songs of the moment (e.g. top hits from MTV), and be able of describing them on the fly and also to categorize them into a defined set of topics. Focusing on this, it is possible to know the 100 top hits of MTV overall the time using the following webpage:
http://www.officialcharts.com/charts/singles-chart/20160624/7501/

###12.3 Project Overview:
The first step of the project will be to build the dataset, following scraping techniques in order to obtain as much song lyrics as possible. It would be good to have an automatic routine to obtain this data. Once the dataset is created, the next step will be to describe each song by means of different descriptions or visualizations. For example, each song could be described by its more frequent words (or ngrams), by the proper names used in it, by the places the song talks about, etc. Visualizations as word clouds or similar could be interesting. NLP basic preprocessing techniques (stopwords removal, stemming, lemmatization, NER, etc.) should be used at the beginning of this stage. Both description and visualization approaches would depend on your creativity, thinking in those aspects that you would like to discover when you listen to a song. Machine learning knowledge could also be used in this scenario. For example, a clustering could be done over the whole set of songs in order to obtain a categorization of all the possible topics of the songs. This way, a new song will be classified automatically in one of the previous defined topics or labels. For example, imagine the new MTV hit and categorize it on the fly, knowing to which of your defined clusters it belongs. With the required representation of the information for this project, it would also be possible to compute the similarity among two songs, or even two artists or groups, at any moment. Interesting visualizations could emerge from this idea of similarity (or proximity, in the sense of its vectorial representation)..

###12.4 Research Goals:
Four main goals can be defined within this project:
1. Construction of a representative dataset using the Web as data source. In the scenario of this project, the data we want to work on and analyze is free and easily to access and extract. This is not always the situation, so it is a good opportunity to explore the best strategies to obtain the data we need.
2. Application of Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques in order to represent the textual infor- mation, analyze and describe it, etc.
3. Use of machine learning (ML) algorithms (clustering?) to discover groups of similar songs in order to define a set of labels or topics for all the songs. With this learned clustering model, it will be possible to categorize new songs (for example, from MTV weekly top hits), or to describe an artist or group based on the distribution of this labels over all its songs.
4. Lots of possibilities of visualization arise from this project: simple top 5 words (or names, or places) from each song (or group of songs, i.e. discography), word clouds describing a song or artist (or a dis- covered cluster), more complex approaches comparing two different artists, etc.

###12.5 Suggested Output:
The output of the project should include the generated dataset of song lyrics, the description of the dataset (by song/artist/group/cluster, comparisons, etc.), including interesting visualizations, and some ML analysis (clustering is just an idea, but not mandatory) over the dataset. The idea of the project is not to limit the analytical creativity, but to be an open project where it is possible to explore whatever your curiosity suggests.

###12.6 Product Follow-Ons (e.g., apps):
As already mentioned, results of the project could be adapted and used to describe and categorize the new songs appearing in different radios or TV music programs. Each time a new song appears, this could be presented (by the TV/radio program) with its most interesting descriptions and its selected label (based on the learned clustering model). It could also of interest for the music programs to compare the new song with old ones (lots of comments and controversy could emerge at this point, which is always valuable from this kind of programs). Prediction on music tendencies could also be a possible application of the research. And the possibility of combine this data with the revenues of the songs could provide an estimation of the revenues for new songs (predictive model). A good representation of the songs textual content, together with the clustering model, could also be used integrated in the recommendation engine of your favorite music player. The recommendations could be based on the topic or cluster you use to prefer and/or in a customized song example with your preferences. This kind of recommendation system will be based in the textual content of the songs, rather than in the preferences of people similar to you. Adding to the initial representation audio features could evolve the research and add more insights (but also complexity).